1) INTRODUCTION
===============

Textnet is a sandbox where a person learns how powerful text can be--in a playful environment. It is very simple visually but has great depths of meaning. It is both for children and for adults.


ENVIRONMENT
-----------
How do players perceive the game? They embody avatars in the 2D environment. The easiest way to imagine it is to think of JRPGs or of rogue-likes like 'Streets of Rogue'. Our inspiration was born there.

A player's avatar is a human-like figure which player controls with cursor keys. That figure moves on 2D plane which we see from the bird's view. It is almost top-down, yet we still see the avatar's body, legs, and feet.

The environment have a fixed width fitting the screen, and it has unlimited depth.


PRIMITIVES
----------
We have this idea of 'primitives' which are better than 'solutions'. While solutions are prescribed, primitives provide for emergent phenomenas.

Primitives are simple but not simplistic. They touch deeper truths and serve as embodiment of laws governing the environment.

By means of example, Minecraft is built on a small set of primitives and basic actions: one can remove blocks or put them back, and one can combine several items into one using simple 2x2 grid (later there is a workbench that extends the grid to 3x3--much bigger!). Everything else is built on top of those primitives. Any object of Minecraft is either a block or an item; except maybe NPCs, yet NPCs are either spawned by throwing items or made from a set of blocks organized in a special way.


### 1) WRITTEN WORD

The floor of the environment can contain text. It is not 'placed' on the floor in a way as the player's avatar is. It is not 'painted' either. It exists in the depths and surfaces to the floor level when players summon them. 

Text lives by its own laws. 

Characters of text (letters) occupy cells of invisible grid, and no two letters can sit in one cell. When a letter surfaces to a cell which is already full, it shifts other letters right. There are some invisible letters (e.g. ‘space') which can only be seen by avatars of sufficient mastery.

A player can summon the Written Word, for that she needs to _kneel_ (by pressing the <KNEEL> key on the keypad). Any letter typed will be summoned to the closest cell, and the kneeled player will move to the next cell. Thus, simply typing in kneeled mode will summon whole words and sentences. 

Written Word can also be banished, and players of sufficient mastery can banish whole words and do other advanced 'text-editing' features.

*One can see that the 'written text' mechanics allows to type relatively easy. The very text you are reading was summoned by a player.*


### 2) SPOKEN WORD

Players can also speak through their avatars. That is done by simply typing at any moment except when kneeled.

Spoken Word appears in convenient comics-style balloons and disappears shortly.


### 3) INVOCATION

Invocation is done by means of Spoken Word. Invocations are sequences of letters, words, or sentences which result in certain action in the environment.

An example: *rain starts after a specific rhyme is spoken.*

To be succesful, invocations must be heard by gods. Without a proper god listening, an invocation is merely a shout. You will learn of gods a tad later.


### 4) ARTIFACTS

It is the main primitive that is not built on text.

An artifact lays on the floor of the environment. It has a visual icon-like representation and its position always aligned with the invisible grid.

While it can have almost arbitrary height, it occupies a number of cells. Artifacts can be as small as 1x1 (an apple), and as big as 16x16 (a car).

Artifacts can't be put on one another.

Artifacts can be passable and impassable. A player can't walk through an impassable artifact. An exception is possible, but requires a certain *mastery*.

Players may interact with any artifact in following ways:

1. They can _pick up_ an artifact, thus removing it from floor.
2. They can _jump_ into an artifact.

Being picked up, artifact stays in the hands of the player's avatar until the player puts it back. *While holding an artifact, no pick up is possible.*

Keys <PICK> and <ENTER> are reserved on the keypad for those actions.

There are two other ways of interaction, but the effect varies for different objects as they are implemented with objects.

When jumped inside, player gets into internal space of the object. It operates in the same way as the main space does: it has a floor where Written Word can be summoned, objects can be placed on that floor.

Objects can be created or destroyed by specific invocations.


### 5) INVENTORY
----------------
Beside an object in hands, players have another place to put their posessions. Such ‘inventory’ is nothing more than an avatar itself. It is just an artifact.

Player can jump into her avatar using combination of keys <SELF> and <ENTER>. Thus player can use her own internals to store objects she picked up earlier.


### 6) OTHER PLAYERS
--------------------
As Textnet is envisioned as a multi-player environment, other players are present as their avatars. They move by their own and they interact with the environment.

Avatars are impassable except of avatars of players of sufficient *mastery*.

A player can't pick another avatar up, neither it can jump into inventory of other player. Instead, a player jumps in a phantom object which is accessible only for both players together.

To come to that place together, they need to jump into each other simultaneously. That makes such space very private.


### 7) ANIMATION
----------------
Written Word can be used to animate artifacts.

Being summoned within the artifact's internal world, certain sentences act as instructions. One can say, that there is a programming language embedded in the Written Word.

Such programming language allows to adjust properties of artifacts, move them around, and to create *listeners*.

*Properties* allows to customise generic behaviour of an artifact. For example, to make it passable. Or to forbid picking it up.

*Listeners* allows the object to react on certain events happening around the artifact or in the artifacts's internal world. For example, it allows an artifact to listen what players say nearby and to perform certain actions.


### 8) ACTIONS
--------------
What animated artifacts can do? They do all the things that players' avatars can.

Animated object can move, jump into other objects, pick other objects and relocate them.

Animated object can locate other objects nearby, have access to the text written on the floor, and can hear what other players say when they are in a certain proximity.


### 9) GODS
-----------
Gods are very powerful animated artifacts.

They populate the 'GODS PLANE' which is accessible only to players of a sufficient *mastery*.

Gods can hear everyone, but they not necessarily listen to everyone. 
Gods can jump into any object except the private 1:1s.
Gods can enter 1:1 with any player they want any time.
Player can jump into 1:1 with his god by invocation if a god
provides one.

*It is also said that you should find God inside.*


### 10) MASTERY
---------------
It is the final thing that governs access to very special features of the game. Little is known about it.

It is however known, that certain gods can give certain levels of mastery via invocation under certain conditions. But what are those invocations and conditions?

*An apocriphal note says, that if you pray to Douglas Engelbart, he may invite you to his space where you will find an invocation that grants you an ephemeral spirit of a rodent that helps you to teleport.*


